hi there my name is Jake and today we're
going to be doing an After Effects
tutorial with production crate talking
about combining different stock elements
and a few compositing techniques to
create a cool explosion shot so let's go
ahead and take a look at what we're
going to be creating
[Music]
oh
all right so lots of fun we've got the
big walking robot and the explosion and
the shock wave we got this uh cool drone
as seen on the uh production crate
website this big walking robot also the
scary thing is also from the production
crate website it's just 10 of these guys
stacked on top of one another to look a
little extra scary pretty much
everything that we use in this tutorial
is all going to be able to be found on
the production create website such as
our hero explosion so make sure you go
check out some of these assets we'll
talk more about these later as we get
into them in the tutorial so without any
further Ado let's go ahead and get right
into it alright so here we are in Adobe
After Effects the first thing we want to
do is import our footage as well as this
render of our big robot if you're going
to be following along these are both
available online for you to download so
let's click import let's grab our
footage drag it down here for a new
composition
and we're ready to get started if you
scrub through you see John he's walking
and boom big explosion in the background
if you zoom in here you can see our shot
is not on a tripod it's not completely
locked off so we're going to need to
track our background so in order to do
that we need to come over here to the
right and look for our tracker window if
you don't see that come up here to
window and look for the check mark next
to tracker so with our footage selected
let's click track motion and let's find
a point of high contrast in the
background I'm going to choose the tip
of this tree here and then I'm going to
click this play button which says
analyze forward now as soon as that's
done we're going to need to create a
null object to apply this data to so
let's come up here to layer new and
choose null object now let's click the
edit Target button to make sure that our
null is selected if you don't see our
new null here just click the drop down
and select it from the list hit OK and
now we have to click apply and then
click OK again on X and Y now our
movement from our background has been
transferred to our null so we're going
to be able to parent assets to this and
anything we put in our frame will look
like it's locked to our footage so
that's going to be very helpful as we
move along all right let's go ahead and
add in our giant robot so that way John
here has a threat that he's stopping
with the explosion and doesn't go from
being a hero to just some sort of
criminal so I'm gonna go ahead and make
this a little bit bigger place it on the
horizon line and now there's a couple
things we need to do to make this a
little bit more integrated as you can
see it's just kind of floating on top of
the frame so we need to use that null
that we created in the last step to
stick this to our background so I'm
going to find the parent link section
which is kind of right around here and
if you don't see that you can toggle the
switches with this button because
sometimes it's hidden I'm going to grab
this which is called the pick Whip and
drag it to the null and now our robot
should be stuck to the background next
one thing that happens when things are
big and far away is there's some Haze on
them they're not always so contrasty
like this so I'm going to need to add a
curves adjustment and match the colors a
little bit now quick warning in this
tutorial I'm going to be using a free
plugin from Video Copilot called FX
console you can find this online
download it install it it's totally free
I recommend it it has sped up my
workflow tremendously so what that's
going to allow me to do is hit control
space to bring up a little search window
and search for Curves and hit enter
and apply any effects I want that way
now if you don't have effects console or
you don't want to install it you just
need to come over here to the effects
and presets tab click in the search
window and search for Curves over here
and drag it to the effects controls on
this side it's the same I just find
effects console to be a little quicker
and smoother so I'm going to be using
this for the tutorial so again control
space search for Curves hit enter and
curves should pop up here so let's grab
this bottom Point drag it up a little
bit higher until the contrast seems to
start matching now I'm going to go to
the red Channel add in a little bit of
warm tones go to the blue Channel and
pull out some of the blue tones that's
looking pretty good we're going to leave
that right there for now so now the next
thing I want to do is grab our explosion
assets from productioncrate.com so I'm
going to type in explosion into the
search window and I'm going to grab a
couple of these ultimate explosions so
how about this first one it's labeled 21
click download
save
and how about this one here this looks
pretty cool 23. download
safe now back here in Adobe After
Effects we're going to go to the project
window double click in the empty space
you can see the two explosions we
downloaded so I'm going to grab those
both and click import now I'm going to
drag out our first one number 21 into
the composition window I'm going to go
to the moment where John here reacts and
I'm going to bring the explosion so that
way it goes off at a time that makes
sense with our actors reaction so I'm
going to place this here above our giant
robot and again we need to parent this
to our null so let's grab the pick whip
connect it to our null and if we hit
play that's already looking pretty cool
now let's take a moment to match the
color of our explosion to the color of
our shot similar to how we did with our
robot so I'm going to click our
explosion control space add a curves
adjustment again let's bring up this
bottom tab so the contrast starts
matching I'm noticing there's a lot more
blue in the explosion than there was in
the robot so let's go to our blue
Channel let's start pulling down some
and I'm going to go to the red Channel
and boost that just a little bit
think that's looking pretty good for now
the other thing I want to point out is
in our original shot from the short that
we showed earlier there was actually
kind of a double explosion effect so
there was the primary one that went off
at his feet boom and then a second later
another one exploded behind the mech so
I'm gonna go back to the project panel
grab the second explosion that we had
bring that down here and I'm gonna
actually put it below the mech so it's
now on layer three I'm gonna drag that
out so it kind of starts going off right
around here around frame 40 and I'm
going to put that off to the right maybe
right there again we need to parent this
to the null so use that pick Whip and I
also want to copy the curves adjustment
from explosion 21 so let's come over to
the effects controls click the curves
click Ctrl C
and then I want to select explosion 23
and hit paste now before we go too much
further let's zoom in here and take a
look at this first explosion it's
actually going on top of our actor and
we need to fix that so grab your footage
hit Ctrl D to duplicate it and put the
copy on top of the explosions now let's
grab our rotobrush tool at the top
double click this copy that we just put
on the top and let's start selecting our
actor so you're just going to draw these
green lines and try and grab all of him
if there's any part that you don't want
hold alt and that will allow you to
subtract it now once you've got a pretty
good selection hit the space bar to
start playing it and check out how it's
capturing our actor this is going to
work just fine for what we need it for
so once you're confident you can hit
this freeze button and wait for that to
finish now once that's finished it's
going to turn this bluish purple color
indicating that it's no longer trying to
update every time you hit play it's
locked on our current selection so let's
click back over into our composition
window at the top and if we solo layer
one you'll notice that we have our actor
chopped out so that's going to come in
handy for a lot of these assets that
we're placing and you'll notice that our
explosion is now underneath him so what
we have right now doesn't look too bad
and it could work but there's a lot more
we could do to this to make it more
realistic that would just kind of spice
up the shot overall so let's grab a
handful of more assets that are going to
be useful the first of which I think are
going to be some small dirt explosions
to cover up this harsh Edge down here at
the bottom and integrate it more with
the ground which is kind of this brown
color so I'm going to come back here to
the production crate website I'm going
to type in dirt and let's go ahead and
grab this one small dirt blast
let's download that and I'm also going
to grab this one here small dirt blast
angled because that's kind of a cool
little directional piece so again back
over to the project panel double click
let's grab our two dirt explosions that
we found click import and I'm gonna grab
the first one bring it out here below
our Roto layer and I'm also going to
give our Roto layer a new color just so
we know that this one always stays on
top
so I'm gonna grab this dirt parent it to
the null just like all the other assets
let's scale it down some
place it here at the feet where the
explosion goes off and let's slide it on
our timeline so it starts at the same
time as our explosion that's looking
pretty good I'm also going to hit
control space add a curves adjustment
and let's match the color of our ground
a little bit so less contrast a little
more warm tones
pull out the blue and the mids and we'll
go ahead and call that good now one of
them does just fine because this Edge is
now feeling a little bit more organic if
we zoom out compared to how it was
before however I know I'm going to want
to cover most of this edge with a
variety of different sizes of our assets
so what we can do is click this hit Ctrl
D and then just slide it to a different
spot maybe we'll make it a little bit
bigger duplicate it again and we're just
going to go around doing this a couple
times another tip I can give you guys is
if you duplicate one of these layers
come over to the project panel select
the other dirt asset that we imported
and click and drag it on top while
holding alt it will swap out the clips
keeping the parent information as well
as the curves adjustment so that's just
like a quick little shortcut for you so
that's looking pretty cool we've got a
bunch of these placed in there and the
edge is starting to look a little more
organic however we just have these dirt
spots sitting on top so again we're
going to be thinking about this in terms
of layers we've broken up our bottom
Edge but now we want to break up some of
these dirt textures so let's grab
another instance of some cool smoke and
place it on top of that so again back to
production crate let's go up to the top
and let's try dust
I'm going to click into this debris
bursts category which has some of the
assets we were looking at earlier and I
found this really cool one down here
this desert Sandy explosion 3 and I
think this is going to work well for us
so let's download that import it into
our After Effects project bring it out
onto our timeline below the Roto layer
parent it to the null position and scale
it and I know I don't want this bottom
part where the explosion initially
happens so I'm going to come up here
select and hold and grab our rectangular
mask tool and let's mask out the bottom
of this asset change the mask from add
to subtract hit F on the keyboard to
bring up the feather properties and
let's feather that out some so the edge
is a little more organic grab our
selection tool and let's position this I
think that looks pretty good right
around there now let's match it to the
color of our ground so I'm going to add
a new effect we haven't used called
tritone so let's grab the eyedropper for
our mid-tone color
and select one of these darker areas on
the ground maybe we can adjust this
color manually until it feels right
that's looking pretty good
and we can even cheat this a little bit
by hitting t on the keyboard and
lowering the opacity sum
somewhere around 75 percent should be
good so that's looking pretty nice this
Edge is definitely a lot more organic
than it was before but we have this
small issue where our dirt layers just
disappear halfway through this effect so
a quick way to make them last till the
end of our composition is just to grab
all of them at once right click go to
time and then choose enable time
remapping
then what we need to do is grab all of
these ending keyframes and slide them
out beyond the end of our timeline and
then grab the edge of all these clips
and slide those out too
so now they're not going to disappear as
the timeline plays they're going to stay
until the very end now one of the last
things we need to do is work on the
different parts of our shock wave and
then we can add some camera shake and
then I think we'll be about done so
let's start on this big outer blast
first and you guessed it we're heading
back to production crate to search for a
Shockwave asset so let's type that into
the top
and we're going to be able to make use
of this first one here air Shockwave
burst one so go ahead and download that
back in After Effects double click to
import find air Shockwave and import
drag that out onto our timeline and
we're going to want to put that below
all of our previous assets just right
above our footage let's drag that over
so it starts at the beginning of the
explosion and scale it down a bit and
just like every asset before it we need
to parent it to null one now by default
this asset is pretty see-through so
let's go ahead and fix that by adding a
curves adjustment so I'm going to add
curves
go to the alpha Channel and let's boost
that up a bit there it is we're able to
see that a little bit better now so a
couple things to note uh the first of
which is that we're losing it on the
edge over here so I do actually need to
scale it up again so let's bring that so
it at least extends outside our frame
reposition it so it's on the explosion
itself that's looking pretty good and
now you're gonna notice that it extends
off into the sky which is obviously not
ideal so let's cheat that with a little
position keyframe so I'm going to go to
right around here hit p on the keyboard
create a keyframe by clicking the
stopwatch go to the end of the clip
where it's about gone and let's slide it
down some now if we play that back
that's looking pretty good to me so now
that we have this placed I'm actually
going to turn down the alpha Just a
Touch
and then I'm going to duplicate this
right click on the second copy go to
time go to Time Stretch and set this to
200 so now this is going to play twice
as slow so it kind of gives us this
double shock wave effect which I think
looks pretty cool now this second copy
that's playing slightly slower what I
want to do is add a box blur to that so
type in box and it's this first one fast
box blur I'm going to set this blur
radius to somewhere around like 25 and
that just gives us a subtle Aftershock
which I think looked pretty cool in the
original example however you're going to
notice that with the slowed down clip
there is this like frame stuttering so
in order to fix that what I'm actually
going to do is click this button here
this empty check box two times one
two it creates this little arrow symbol
which is going to do some frame
interpolation so now it'll take longer
to load but it'll play a lot smoother
now the last part of this big shock wave
is actually just created from a solid in
order to brighten up the initial
explosion so I'm going to hit Ctrl y on
the keyboard to create a new solid
set the color to white click OK and now
I'm going to scale this up a little bit
bigger than my composition window just
so there's room for it to slide around
parent it to null one same as everything
else and let's click and hold and select
the ellipse mask tool hold Ctrl to draw
a circle out from the center of this
explosion if you want the circle to be
perfect you hold shift and let's make it
about this big now with that solid
selected let's hit mm on the keyboard to
bring up the mask properties and let's
go to the beginning of the explosion and
shrink the mask expansion down until the
circle is gone set a keyframe move
forward 10 or 15 frames and let's bring
the mask expansion all the way up so the
circle fills the whole frame now next
what we can do is duplicate this mask by
hitting Ctrl D set the second copy to
subtract and then slide the second
keyframe of the second mask over some to
create this ring shape now let's go back
up to our toolbar and grab the
rectangular mask tool zoom out some here
and I'm going to draw a rectangular mask
roughly around the Horizon and then set
that to subtract so we've created this
interesting shape that extends from the
explosion now let's feather it out some
more so it looks more organic hit F on
the keyboard to bring up the feather
properties of all of your masks and just
start increasing those to taste
somewhere around 100 pixels looks pretty
good to me now let's hit t on the
keyboard to bring up the opacity and
let's set that somewhere pretty low
maybe around 20 percent and it's subtle
but there's the big outer part of our
shock wave so let's move on to the dust
that flies at our actor across the
ground and that's going to be made up of
three different assets so it's going to
be this one here the dusty Shockwave
front download that scroll down here
this one called Shockwave perspective
three download that and then let's come
up here to the top and type in dust
go to the specialty category
and then it's this first one here titled
atmosphere towards cam so let's grab
that as well so let's go back to After
Effects import our three new assets and
let's first bring out this Dusty
Shockwave front I'm going to put this
below our Roto layer but above
everything else parent it to null one
which by the way you don't have to use
the pick whip if your list is getting
long you can click this drop down and
just find your null
let's slide it over so it starts at the
beginning of the explosion same as
everything else scale it down some bring
it to the base let's drop the opacity by
half let's add the tritone effect and
again select that mid-tone color grab
something from the field but because
this asset is so bright and it has lots
of these highlights let's grab that
color as well and select one of these
lighter Dusty colors next let's grab our
Shockwave perspective three I'm going to
put this below all of our other assets
parent it to the null slide it over so
it starts at the beginning of the
explosion and let's scale this one up
really big so it fills the frame and
let's also squish it some so it appears
to be more flat put this at the base of
the explosion and similar to our other
Shockwave asset from earlier we're gonna
have to cheat this with a keyframe so
let's go to the beginning hit P click
the stopwatch and let's slide all the
way until it looks like the shock wave
is finished moving and let's slide it
down some now I'm going add the tritone
effect to this one as well grab that
highlight color and again click one of
these lighter areas and maybe that's
just a bit too dark so I'm going to go
and manually edit it to be just a touch
brighter
somewhere around there looks good and
lastly let's go ahead and grab our
atmosphere toward Cam and let's put it
on top of everything but right below our
Roto layer parent it to the null slide
it over so it starts at the beginning of
the explosion let's reposition it some
and I'm going to go to where the
explosion is at its biggest
hit t on the keyboard and let's change
the opacity to 50 click the stopwatch
and let's go to the beginning of the
explosion and set the opacity to zero so
that's just going to slowly fade on over
time and look like some dust has been
kicked off the ground by that residual
shock wave
same as our other asset the color is
just a little bit too white so we can
actually select that go to the effects
controls grab the tritone hit Ctrl C
click back on our atmosphere asset and
hit Ctrl V and I also want to brighten
this one up manually too now I'm feeling
really happy with this and I think we've
pretty much got our asset bases covered
so let's go ahead and pre-compose all of
this so we can add some camera shake
some glow some color correction and then
we'll call it good so grab your top
layer scroll all the way down to the
bottom hold shift and select your last
layer and then hit Ctrl shift C on the
keyboard to pre-compose I'm going to
call this come deposit so now all of
this has been brought into a pre-comp
that we can access later and it's going
to make this a lot easier since we're
just dealing with one layer now all
right now let's go ahead and take care
of the camera Shake we're going to be
using a script from production crate so
you can head over to the website and
download it from the link here now back
in After Effects in order to run the
script we need to go to file scripts and
choose run script file navigate to the
camera Shake script and hit open this
little dialog pops up with tons of great
little options I'll just show you some
that worked for me select your composite
layer
go to the moment where the explosion
first starts
change it from Shake to jolt
I liked jolt number two and let's turn
the amplitude up to somewhere around
three and a half the frequency down
quite a bit maybe around like 0.7 let's
change skip keys to two that'll just
make it a little more gradual and I'm
going to turn off auto scale just so I
can show you how to fix this manually as
another little quick tip now let's hit
jolt and this is just a warning telling
you that it's going to take a minute to
load so it's okay just hit continue
and we can also now exit out of this
dialog now if you play this back
it's looking pretty cool we have this
nice big bump when the explosion goes
off now the reason I turned off auto
scale is because sometimes you might
find yourself in a situation where your
footage has been slid off the screen and
you're left with these black borders
where there's no more footage to be
shown now you can just scale this up but
then you're going to be losing some of
the footage that you worked so hard to
make look cool so that's not always an
ideal solution so there's an effect that
we can use to quickly solve this called
motion tile so let's add the motion tile
effect then we need to select mirror
edges then we need to change the output
width and output height to something
that's going to cover those black edges
so call it around 150 each now let's go
ahead and add the glow but if we just
put the glow effect on our footage we're
going to affect the sky and some of the
ground and a lot of these other bright
parts of the frame too so what we need
to do is isolate just the orange in the
explosion so a quick way to do that is
to duplicate the composite
solo the top one and let's add the key
light effect to it and this is usually
for green screens but we're going to use
it in a weird way right now so grab the
screen color select one of your oranges
then toggle open the screen mat and we
need to play with these settings until
we can mostly isolate just the orange
now that's looking pretty good to me
let's add a fast box blur set the blur
radius to around 100 pixels and then
let's add the tint effect and set the
white color to Something in the orange
fiery range something maybe around there
we can unsolo this now and set the
transfer mode if you don't see the
transfer mode again we can toggle
switches to unhide it set that to screen
and there we go we just have a very
quick subtle glow effect applied just to
the oranges in our explosion and last
but not least let's go ahead and add
some color correction so I'm going to go
to layer new adjustment layer and to
this adjustment layer on top I'm going
to add a curves adjustment let's go
ahead and bring our mid tones down some
bring our highlights up to add some
contrast maybe we can go to the blue
Channel and add some blues in the
shadows but pull it out of the
highlights and mid-tones
and maybe we can do the same for the
Reds except let's pull it out of the
shadows and add it to the mid
and maybe we can throw the vignette
effect on this
turn the amount down some and then maybe
a levels adjustment right on top to dial
in our contrast just a little bit more
and if you want you can maybe throw a
hue and saturation adjustment on top of
that and let's change the channel
control from Master to Reds and let's
make our explosion a little more orange
maybe five degrees on the Hue angle and
a little bit less saturated and if you
hit this visibility icon you can see the
before and after I think that looks
pretty cool and I think that's where
we're going to leave it for the tutorial
this turned out pretty cool in my
opinion if there's uh one thing that we
can take away from this it's to think in
terms of layers right so you need to put
down your base explosion or whatever
your hero asset is and then just build
from there think logically the explosion
goes off what's next how about some dirt
the shock wave comes flying out how
about it kicks up some dust on the
ground then there's some residual smoke
and so on and so on never constrain
yourself to a single asset and always be
thinking about these as puzzle pieces
you can put together to make something
bigger but anyway thank you all for
watching hope you enjoyed the tutorial
and we'll see you in the next one